
[[1. An introduction to Research Methodology|Previous]] | [[3. Choosing a Topic|Next]]

---

Now, in the context of finding a research problem and looking for a starting point, the natural question of "Am I ready for research" might rise. Answers to this question are very individual, and depend also on the context of the research, additional exogenous deadlines and the motivation for performing research.

As a guideline, we will go over some necessary background one might look for before starting a new research project.

> [!cite] 
> The experience of teachers in all types of school settings is that all students can successfully engage in mathematics research. 


But first, you have to consider your practicalities & priorities: 
- What are your main interests in performing research? Do you have a problem you want to solve already in your free time, or are you on a fixed deadline for a given research program.
- Are you in a complete team dedicated to solving a single problem for the foreseeable future, or are you tackling an applied task your P.I. wants you to finish as fast as possible? 

If you can answer these questions and the answer still points you towards doing research, then you are most likely ready to do research. The question now is does the topics you are interested in match your current knowledge and ability? More often than not, students will incorrectly judge their own knowledge of a topic, both frequently over- or underestimate how much they know. 

> A good way to test your knowledge and see if you are ready to spend some months on a project without wasting your own time is to start with the project proposal, and share it with your mentors or advisors. We will see shortly how to write a proposal, where the core aspect will be the research question. 

> The research proposal should contain a question that is both non-trivial and interesting enough, but not impossible. For this, students should be able to clearly state the problem(s) and question(s) regarding the problem they want to tackle. The research question is the main guiding aspect from the initial proposal to the final write-up, and gives a natural lead towards building the experiments or/and the conjectures to be proved or demonstrated.


When you understand the problem being posed either by yourself or your mentors, we highly suggest you gather a short list of existing references related to the problem. This short introductory bibliography can give way to a more in-depth literature review, which we will cover more in-depth in the next lecture, if the problem depth and project deadline allow for it. This starting set of references should help you get started with understanding the knowledge baggage required for the project, and will give you a sense of whether or not you know enough to tackle the question posed.


At the end of this initial screening of research questions, you might find yourself asking why do any of this if you already have an idea of what you want to work on. When this happens, it is first necessary to understand why we do research in the first place. 
Research is an important tool in advancing our understanding of the sciences, as well as solving real-world problems. It is a growing field and is of fundamental importance in our society, for which a formal workflow is required to make the resulting research meaningful and actually make useful contributions. 

Choosing a topic correctly and a respective research question are ways to ensure your abilities match the difficulty of the problem, as well as help you to make the most of your time based on your current knowledge.

---

In the next lecture we will discuss how to choose topics for a research project, as well as how to ensure the topic is adequate for your own context.

---

[[1. An introduction to Research Methodology|Previous]] | [[3. Choosing a Topic|Next]]
