
[[4. Starting your Research|Previous]] | [[4.2 Evaluating the quality of a Question|Next]]

---

> [!cite]
> A **research question** is a specific, targeted inquiry that serves as the foundation for a long-term, open-ended exploration where answers to related questions connect and build upon each other. 

> Unlike a research setting, which is a situation or object of interest that comes without an initial problem statement, a research question provides a defined purpose and direction for investigation and can be studied without having to build the formal background of a research project from scratch.

In this lecture, we move from the general idea of "Choosing a Topic" to the specific activity of **finding and refining your own research question**. Usually if you start in an existing research group, these will be handed out to you already. It is nonetheless still essential to understand how the underlying question is found and what it means for you when working on a project. While a topic provides a broad area of interest, a research question is a targeted inquiry which guides all further investigations to be made, and allows you to build a cohesive body of work by guiding the flow of ideas. We will see at the end of this mini-course how the research question is the starting point of your journal, and how it connects to all work to be done.

> The Iterative Nature of Questions
> It is important to understand that finding a research question is rarely a one-step process. In mathematical research, it is natural to experience **many iterations** of a question as you gain a deeper understanding of your topic. You may start with a broad observation and, through generating examples, find that your initial question was too vague or perhaps even "impossible". However, you should try and **not change** your research question as much as possible, as it will usually require reformulating much of your existing work on the project. So, take the process of finding a good question seriously.

Furthermore, you do not need to limit yourself to just one question. Good research often involves a **sequence of related investigations** where the answer to one question naturally leads to the next. By the end of this phase, you may find yourself with a primary question and several secondary extensions, which always increases the sense of seriousness of your work, by showing efforts where made to tackle the problem extensively.

> About the *research agenda*

Before you commit extensive time to deep investigation, you must formalize your direction. The central component of this formalization is your **research agenda**. This is the "one true source" for your project, acting as a foundational document that clarifies your goals. Within your research agenda, you should:

- **Describe the Problem:** Clearly state the specific assumptions, definitions and initial references used. These should lead naturally to justify the questions you posed and hope to answer.
- **Explain the Appeal:** Identify the source of the problem and why it is mathematically interesting or aesthetically pleasing in the current state of the field or industry.
- **Outline Initial Steps:** Provide a "(mathematical) experimental design" that identifies the **variables you will study** and the **data you will collect**.

This agenda gives you an essential **initial sense of direction**. For example, if you are studying a numerical sequence, your agenda might specify that you will collect the first 50 terms to look for patterns of divisibility or growth rates.


---

In the next lecture, we will quickly cover what a good research question in terms of quality means, and how you can evaluate the quality of your own questions.

It will be a short lecture to ensure you are confident enough to move on to writing a research proposal.

---

[[4. Starting your Research|Previous]] | [[4.2 Evaluating the quality of a Question|Next]]

