
[[4.1 Finding a Research Question|Previous]] | [[4.3 Writing a Project Proposal|Next]]

---

Evaluating the Quality of Your Question

As you move from a "setting/topic" toward a specific question, use the following criteria to ensure your question is productive and can be used formally within your project to guide the ensuing conjectures or experiments. A strong question is essential to your research journey, as it will affect how and which experiments and proofs you will come across, as well as what conjectures you end up proving.


## Clarity and Uniformity

> Can the question be interpreted in only one way? A question that is too vague such as "what happens if I use curves?" requires further definition of the type and orientation of those curves before research can begin. If you feel yourself having to define too many elements you don't have yet the mastery to define, maybe your research question is 1. too complex, or 2. your topic is not yet adequate for your level of expertise. For the latter, consult our lecture on [[3. Choosing a Topic]].

Ask yourself: Could another student on your level of seniority (but not with the same specific knowledge as you) interpret your question exactly as you intend without additional explanation?

## Originality

> Is the question "original to you"? While it doesn't have to be a question never asked in the history of mathematics, the most exciting research involves uncharted territory where the answer isn't already known to you via a textbook (which transforms the project into simply reproducing results). 
> 
> Additionally, you will find that questions that are too applied (reduces the generalizability of your results) or specific (reduces broader relevance of the results) are usually not that interesting, and even though they might be original, are not that useful for expanding the field.

Ask yourself: do these questions feel like they could _lead somewhere_, not just be answered (i.e., the famous "what matters is the journey, not the destination" can also be applied to research).

(Note: do note that originality is always **relative**, but we can often pinpoint existing literature well enough to have a general sense of how original our questions are)

## Feasibility vs. Challenge

> The question should be challenging enough that there is no obvious method of attack, but it should not be a famous unsolved problem that has stumped professionals for decades. I.e., the question should naturally require more exploration and experimentation in regards to your current knowledge, be it in terms of reviewing papers or performing actual novel experiments.

As a rule of thumb, if you cannot even find or identify a starting point to begin (if you don't know of existing examples to tackle similar problems, special cases, or computational experiments to perform) then the question is probably too ambitious.

Ask yourself: what is a simple case of this question? Could I work on it or do I already have in mind what kind of experiments I would need to perform to verify it?


## Capacity for Analysis

> Does the question allow for more than just data collection? A good research question should eventually lead you to ask "**why**" a pattern exists, moving from observation to proof. Do note that this is a general rule for mathematics and CS research, but research projects performing literature review or database creation exist, which might diverge from this rule.

Questions that only produce isolated results without deeper structure tend to stall quickly and might even not produce usable results or an interesting write-up.

Ask yourself: Does your question require a generalization, a proof, or similar to be made for the question to be satisfied? Or does gathering existing data or results solve it?

## Extensions/Expandability

If your question expands on existing settings or results, you might also consider the criteria of expandability, i.e., is the question posed an actual extension or just some simple reformulation of the existing problem.

Strong research questions tend to generate 1. natural generalizations, as we mentioned already; 2. variations under modified assumptions; 3. connections to other areas.

---

As mentioned in the previous lecture, this is a very simple lecture, and should serve more as an heuristic guide to help you find your research questions. However, there is no general answer on how to pose questions, and even the best mathematicians have a hard time finding good questions themselves, so try and don't feel overwhelmed with methodological approaches to this step in your journey.

---

[[4.1 Finding a Research Question|Previous]] | [[4.3 Writing a Project Proposal|Next]]
